docs: routing (#220)
cloudflare/next-on-pages: docs/routing.md

# Routing

To serve incoming requests for a Next.js application deployed on Cloudflare Pages, a worker needs to be able to accurately point the request to the correct route. Routes in a Next.js app can be built as either be functions that need to be ran on the server, or static files that can just be served. In both cases, there are a series of steps that have to be taken to determine the correct destination.

When building an application, the Vercel CLI takes a project and generates a configuration file that defines how the application should be served. This configuration file is useful in determining what happens at each stage of the routing process.

To offer the best support for Next.js applications, the worker needs to try and replicate the routing process that Vercel uses.

## Routing Phases

> In order to explain how routing works, it is important to first understand the underlying stages that the system goes through. These are taken from the Vercel build output config, and interpreted in a way that can be used by the worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to explain how routing works, it is important to first understand the underlying stages that the system goes through. These are taken from the Vercel build output config (as per the [Vercel documentation](https://vercel.com/docs/build-output-api/v3/configuration#handler-route)), and interpreted in a way that can be used by the worker.
```

The routing process is broken down into a series of different phases.

- `none` (no phase specified)
- `filesystem`
- `rewrite`
- `resource`
- `miss`
- `error`
- `hit`

Each phase is processed in a somewhat sequential order, depending on the outcome of the previous phase. At different points, certain configuration options are applied, the final destination may be updated, or the final response object is modified.

> After checking the [source routes](https://vercel.com/docs/build-output-api/v3/configuration#source-route) for each phase, the system will check the build output to determine if the file path exists or not. If it can find a record for the path, it runs the `hit` phase and then breaks out of the routing system to return a response to the client.

Reviewer: can you also mention that if there are errors it goes to `error`? (since here you are mentioning how the response is returned I think that it would be appropriate to mention the error scenario as well?)

## Routing Process

Now that we have a better understanding of the different phases, we can look at how the routing process works as a whole. The actual system that was designed to handle this is a little complex, but it can be broken down into a series of steps.

Along the way, there are several times where custom behaviour has had to be introduced. This is, in part, to maximise the amount of features we support, but also because the routing system used internally by Vercel is not necessarily documented that much. Our system is custom built to serve requests, designed around our understanding of how Vercel's system should function with the Vercel build output.

A simplistic overview of the routing process is as follows.

- Call the handler with the request.
- Check each phase from the build output configuration.
  - Check each source route in a phase to see if it matches.
  - If a match is found, apply any relevant response modifiers.
  - Determine what to do next; return the match, or continue through routing.
- Run the matched function, or fetch the matched static asset.
- Return the final response.

### Checking Phases

> The first thing that happens when a request is received, is that the router starts looking for matches in the `none` phase. It calls a function to start checking phases. This function is called recursively to check additional phases.

Reviewer: sorry I find this sentence kind of unclear, I think I do get the point but I feel like it could be presented better in a simpler way

mh.... now that I think about it, is this really necessary? isn't this describing the implementation too much into details? (like I care that we check each phase but I don't necessarily want to know if there is a function that does that and if the function is called recursively, especially since that is one of those things likely things to change with refactoring and whatnot)

> For every single source route in a phase, it calls to check whether the route is a match, and process the relevant details (more on checking source routes can be seen below). When it receives a response from the route checker, if it encountered an error — normally from running middleware — it will break out of the routing process and return the error response. Otherwise, the only other time it disables the continuation of routing is if the route checker returns a final match, i.e. it is done for that phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every single source route in a phase, we check to see whether the route is a match, and process the relevant details (for more details on source checking see the [Checking Source Routes section](#checking-source-routes)). When we receive a response from the route checker, if we encountered an error — normally from running middleware — we break out of the routing process and return the error response. Otherwise, the only other time we disable the continuation of routing is if the route checker returns a final match.
```

Reviewer: I've changed all the sentences with "it" as subject to "we", just because I don't think that specifically mentioning the function is very beneficial, but anyways if doesn't need to be "we" it could be "it" if we introduce the subject at the beginning, like "The handling process" or whatever makes more sense 🤔

In all other cases, it attempts to retrieve the next phase, based on the current phase. Afterwards, it recursively calls the function so that it can check the next phase.

#### Diagram

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    checkPhase --for each route--> checkRoute
    checkRoute --> CheckRouteResult{check result}
    CheckRouteResult -->|error| checkPhase
    CheckRouteResult -->|done| IsPhaseHit{phase == hit}
    CheckRouteResult -->|skip or next| CheckRouteResult
    IsPhaseHit --> |yes| EndIsPhaseHit[matching done]
    IsPhaseHit --> |no| IsPhaseMiss{phase == miss}
    IsPhaseMiss --> |yes| Set404[set 404]
    Set404 --> NextPhaseIsWhat{path found or phase == miss/error}
    IsPhaseMiss --> |no| NextPhaseIsWhat
    NextPhaseIsWhat --> |true - set next phase to hit| checkPhase
    NextPhaseIsWhat --> |get next phase| getNextPhase --> checkPhase

    getNextPhase --> NextPhaseIs{determine next phase}
    NextPhaseIs --> |none| NextIsFS[filesystem]
    NextPhaseIs --> |filesystem| NextIsRW[rewrite]
    NextPhaseIs --> |rewrite| NextIsRS[resource]
    NextPhaseIs --> |resource| NextIsMS[miss]
    NextPhaseIs --> |all others| NextIsMS

> ```

Author: Personally, I am not a fan of how much vertical space it takes up. It would be nice to be able to move the position of things and condense them, but that didn't appear to be an option.

> ```

Reviewer: yeah I totally agree, as I said I did try some stuff but it's a bit tricky, I'll try to think of some alternatives :confused:

### Checking Source Routes

For every source route in a phase, we need to check for a match and process it accordingly.

#### Source Matching

The first step in this part of the process is checking the value for the route matches up with the current path. At the same time, this also extracts any dynamic parameters.

> Checking a route is a match involves verifying that the request method is the same, the correct fields are or aren't specified, and the current path name matches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checking whether a route is a match involves verifying that the request method is the same, the correct fields are or aren't specified, and the current path name matches.
```

> If the route was not a match, we simply return that we want to skip it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the route was not a match, we simply skip it (i.e. it doesn't involve the current request).
```

#### Overrides

> In different phases, different things may be applied to our response object, or modify the current requests details. The first thing we check for is whether a source route wants to override the current headers and status code and, if so, reset them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In different phases, different things may be applied to our response object, or modify the current requests details. The first thing we check for is whether a (matching) source route wants to override the current headers and status code and, if so, reset them.
```

#### Middleware

Next up, any middleware is run. Middleware occurs during the `none` phase, at the very start of the routing process. The response headers from the middleware and taken and applied to the request and the response object, where appropriate.

Additionally, it is important to check whether the middleware was a rewrite, so that the current path can be updated.

> If running the middleware failed, we have to bail out of routing and return an error to the client.

Reviewer: do we return an error response right await of do we go to the `error` phase?

Author: we return an error response back to the router, and the router then enters the error phase. will clarify that we enter the error phase right away.

#### Headers and Status Code

Source routes are able to specify headers and status codes to apply to the response. These are updated internally so that they can be applied to the final response object.

There are two different types of headers that the build output config can provide. There are important ones, and normal ones. Whether headers should be treated as important is denoted by the presence of an `important` property on a source route. We believe that this indicated that the headers should take precendence over all others on the final response object.

#### Destination

> If a source route wants to rewrite the current path to point to a different file, it specifies a destination property. These are taken and the current path is updated, along with applying any search parameters we have collected.

Reviewer: What do you mean with "these are taken"? with "these" you mean the destinations?

what about
```suggestion
If a source route wants to rewrite the current path to point to a different file, it specifies a destination property. We take such destination from (matching) source routes and replace the current path with them, along with applying any search parameters we might have collected.
```
?

This can be somewhat problematic.

Requests that should be interpreted as requesting the `RSC` version of a page need to enter the `none` phase to receive a rewrite to the `RSC` path. However, if we assume that `check` should take us back to `filesytem`, instead of the routes that aren't in a phase, we would end up not supporting `RSC` pages properly.

Therefore, when the rewritten path has changed, we send the request back to the `none` phase, so that it can be processed from the start.

In the event that the rewritten path is the same as the current path, we opt to send the request to the next phase when the current phase is not `miss`. This custom check for the `miss` phase is necessary in order to prevent infite loops for requests to `/_next/static/...`, and `/_next/data/...`, as they may be rewritten to themselves when calling `check`. As such, if we are in the `miss` phase, we instead update the status code to 404.

#### Continuing with the Routing Process

> After all of the above has been completed, the final part to check for a route is whether it would like us to continue matching. If it does not, we have reached the end of matching for this phase, so we can simply exit out with the `done` response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all of the above has been completed, the final part to check for a (matching) route is whether it would like us to continue matching (it does so by setting its `continue` field to `true`). If it does not, we have reached the end of matching for this phase.
```

The `done` response is an implementation details you'd added there right? if so its presence here can make things a bit confusion I think 🤔

#### Diagram

> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     checkRoute --> CheckSourceMatch{check source match}
>     CheckSourceMatch -->|true| ApplyOverrides[apply overrides]
>     CheckSourceMatch -->|false| EndRoutingSkip[return `skip`]
>     ApplyOverrides --> HasMiddleware{has middleware}
>     HasMiddleware --> |yes| RunMiddlewareResult{run middleware}
>     HasMiddleware --> |no| ApplyHeaders
>     RunMiddlewareResult --> |success| ApplyHeaders
>     RunMiddlewareResult --> |error| EndRoutingError[return `error`]
>     ApplyHeaders --> ApplyStatusCode[apply status code]
>     ApplyStatusCode --> ApplyDestination
>     ApplyDestination --> ShouldCheck{should check filesystem}
>     ShouldCheck --> |yes| PathsEqual{new path is equal}
>     PathsEqual --> |yes + phase = miss| Return404[set status to 404] --> ShouldContinue
>     PathsEqual --> |yes + phase != miss| checkNextPhase[check next phase]
>     PathsEqual --> |false| checkNonePhase[check `none` phase]
>     ShouldCheck --> |false| ShouldContinue{should continue}
>     ShouldContinue --> |true| ReturnNext[return `next`]
>     ShouldContinue --> |false| ReturnDone[return `done`]
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    checkRoute --> CheckSourceMatch{check source match}
    CheckSourceMatch -->|true| ApplyOverrides[apply overrides]
    CheckSourceMatch -->|false| EndRoutingSkip[`skip`]
    ApplyOverrides --> HasMiddleware{has middleware}
    HasMiddleware --> |yes| RunMiddlewareResult{run middleware}
    HasMiddleware --> |no| ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination[apply headers\napply status code\napply destination]
    RunMiddlewareResult --> |success| ApplyHeaders[apply headers]
    RunMiddlewareResult --> |error| EndRoutingError[`error`]
    ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination --> ShouldCheck{should check filesystem}
    ShouldCheck --> |yes| PathsEqual{new path is equal}
    PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase = miss| Return404[set status to 404] --> ShouldContinue
    PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase != miss| checkNextPhase[check next phase]
    PathsEqual --> |false| checkNonePhase[check `none` phase]
    ShouldCheck --> |false| ShouldContinue{should continue}
    ShouldContinue --> |true| ReturnNext[`next`]
    ShouldContinue --> |false| ReturnDone[`done`]
```
```

After all the source routes in the current phase have been checked, we move on to determine what will happen next. If the current phase is the `hit` phase, or the route has at some point been rewritten to an URL, the routing is complete and we're ready to server the the response.

If the current phase is `miss`, we check the build output, if there is no file matching the requested one we set the status code to 404. Afterwards, if a file was found in the output, or the current phase is `error`, we move on to the `hit` phase. It is important that the `hit` phase is run every time a match is found in the build output or when the current phase is `miss` or `error`, because this allows us to update the headers for the response with the current matched path.

In all other cases, we attempt to retrieve the next phase, based on the current one, and iterate forward.

#### Diagram

> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     checkPhase[check phase] --for each route--> checkRoute
>     checkRoute[check route] -->|error| checkPhase
>     checkRoute -->|done| phaseHitMiss{is phase\nhit or miss?}
>     phaseHitMiss --> |phase == hit| matchingDone[matching done]
>     phaseHitMiss --> |phase == miss| set404[set 404]
>     phaseHitMiss --> |phase not neither| nextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nor\nphase == miss/error}
>     set404 --> nextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nsuccessfully?}
>     nextPhaseIsWhat --> |true\nset next phase to hit| checkPhase
>     nextPhaseIsWhat --> |false\nset next phase| checkPhase
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    checkPhase[check phase] --for each route--> checkRoute
    checkRoute[check route] -->|error| checkPhase
    checkRoute -->|done| phaseHitMiss{is phase\nhit or miss?}
    phaseHitMiss --> |phase == hit| matchingDone[matching done]
    phaseHitMiss --> |phase == miss| set404[set 404]
    phaseHitMiss --> |phase not neither| nextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nor\nphase == miss/error}
    set404 --> nextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nsuccessfully?}
    nextPhaseIsWhat --> |yes\nset next phase to hit| checkPhase
    nextPhaseIsWhat --> |no\nset next phase| checkPhase
```
```
sorry I just noticed this after seeing the other diagram 🙇

In the event that the rewritten path is the same as the current path, we opt to send the request to the next phase when the current phase is not `miss`. This custom check for the `miss` phase is necessary in order to prevent infite loops for requests to `/_next/static/...`, and `/_next/data/...`, as they may be rewritten to themselves when calling `check`. As such, if we are in the `miss` phase, we instead update the status code to 404.

If the rewritten path was not equal to the current path but the current phase is `miss`, we instead send the request to the `filesystem` phase if the path does not exist in the build output. If it does exist, we just reset the status code if it was previously 404. This is to deal with the case where a rewrite in the `none` phase contrasts with one in the `miss` phase, e.g. with internationalization (i18n).

#### Continuing with the Routing Process

After all of the above has been completed, the final part to check for a (matching) route is whether it would like us to continue matching (it does so by setting its `continue` field to `true`). If it does not, we have reached the end of matching for this phase.

#### Diagram

> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     checkRoute --> CheckSourceMatch{check source match}
>     CheckSourceMatch -->|true| ApplyOverrides[apply overrides]
>     CheckSourceMatch -->|false| EndRoutingSkip[`skip`]
>     ApplyOverrides --> ApplyInternationalization[apply internationalization\nredirects]
>     ApplyInternationalization --> HasMiddleware{has middleware}
>     HasMiddleware --> |yes| RunMiddlewareResult{run middleware}
>     HasMiddleware --> |no| ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination[apply route headers\napply status code\napply destination]
>     RunMiddlewareResult --> |success| ApplyMiddlewareHeaders[apply middleware\nheaders]
>     RunMiddlewareResult --> |error| EndRoutingError[`error`]
>     ApplyMiddlewareHeaders --> ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination
>     ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination --> ShouldCheck{should check filesystem}
>     ShouldCheck --> |yes| PathsEqual{new path is equal}
>     PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase = miss| Return404[set status to 404] --> ShouldContinue
>     PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase != miss| checkNextPhase[check next phase]
>     PathsEqual --> |false| checkNonePhase[check `none` phase]
>     ShouldCheck --> |false| ShouldContinue{should continue\n and has no\nredirect}
>     ShouldContinue --> |true| ReturnNext[`next`]
>     ShouldContinue --> |false| ReturnDone[`done`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    checkRoute --> CheckSourceMatch{path matches source?}
    CheckSourceMatch -->|yes| ApplyOverrides[apply overrides]
    CheckSourceMatch -->|no| EndRoutingSkip[`skip`]
    ApplyOverrides --> ApplyInternationalization[apply internationalization\nredirects]
    ApplyInternationalization --> HasMiddleware{has middleware}
    HasMiddleware --> |yes| RunMiddlewareResult{run middleware}
    HasMiddleware --> |no| ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination[apply route headers\napply status code\napply destination]
    RunMiddlewareResult --> |success| ApplyMiddlewareHeaders[apply middleware\nheaders]
    RunMiddlewareResult --> |error| EndRoutingError[`error`]
    ApplyMiddlewareHeaders --> ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination
    ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination --> ShouldCheck{route.check === true}
    ShouldCheck --> |yes| PathsEqual{current path\n==\nrewritten path}
    PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase = miss| Return404[set status to 404] --> ShouldContinue
    PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase != miss| checkNextPhase[check next phase]
    PathsEqual --> |no| checkNonePhase[check `none` phase]
    ShouldCheck --> |no| ShouldContinue{should continue\n and has no\nredirect}
    ShouldContinue --> |yes| ReturnNext[`next`]
    ShouldContinue --> |no| ReturnDone[`done`]
```
ok then, just some minor changes 🙂

### Checking Phases

When we receive a request, the router looks for matches in the different phases, starting at the `none` phase.

For every single source route in a phase, we check to see whether the route is a match, and process the relevant details (for more details on source checking see the [Checking Source Routes section](#checking-source-routes)). When we receive a response from the route checker, if we encountered an error — normally from running middleware — we break out of the routing process and return the error response. Otherwise, the only other time we disable the continuation of routing is if the route checker returns a final match.

After all the source routes in the current phase have been checked, we move on to determine what will happen next. If the current phase is the `hit` phase, or the route has at some point been rewritten to an URL, the routing is complete and we're ready to server the the response.

> If the current phase is `miss`, we check the build output, if there is no file matching the requested one we set the status code to 404. Afterwards, if a file was found in the output, or the current phase is `error`, we move on to the `hit` phase. It is important that the hit phase is run every time a match is found in the build output or when the current phase is `miss` or `error`, because this allows us to update the headers for the response with the current matched path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the current phase is `miss`, we check the build output, if there is no file matching the requested one we set the status code to 404. Afterwards, if a file was found in the output, or the current phase is `error`, we move on to the `hit` phase. It is important that the `hit` phase is run every time a match is found in the build output or when the current phase is `miss` or `error`, because this allows us to update the headers for the response with the current matched path.
```

In all other cases, we attempt to retrieve the next phase, based on the current one, and iterate forward.

#### Diagram

> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     checkPhase --for each route--> checkRoute
>     checkRoute --> CheckRouteResult{check result}
>     CheckRouteResult -->|error| checkPhase
>     CheckRouteResult -->|done| IsPhaseHit{phase == hit}
>     CheckRouteResult -->|skip or next| CheckRouteResult
>     IsPhaseHit --> |yes| EndIsPhaseHit[matching done]
>     IsPhaseHit --> |no| IsPhaseMiss{phase == miss}
>     IsPhaseMiss --> |yes| Set404[set 404]
>     Set404 --> NextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nor\nphase == miss/error}
>     IsPhaseMiss --> |no| NextPhaseIsWhat
>     NextPhaseIsWhat --> |if true\nset next phase to hit| checkPhase
>     NextPhaseIsWhat --> |if false\nget next phase| getNextPhase --> checkPhase
> 
>     NextPhaseIs{determine next phase} -->
>     getNextPhase --> NextPhaseIs{determine next phase}
> 
>     NextPhaseIs --> |none| NextIsFS[filesystem]
>     NextPhaseIs --> |filesystem| NextIsRW[rewrite]
>     NextPhaseIs --> |rewrite| NextIsRS[resource]
>     NextPhaseIs --> |resource| NextIsMS[miss]
>     NextPhaseIs --> |all others| NextIsMS
> ```

Reviewer: I've been trying to improve this as the diagram fells too much complex/big to me, but it's a bit tricky 😓

Could something like this work?
![Screenshot 2023-05-11 at 23 46 19](https://github.com/cloudflare/next-on-pages/assets/61631103/5ca4a725-08d4-43b7-9760-697fbdae2111)

I _think_ that the rest of the info is present in the md already so here we can simplify things a bit?

```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    checkPhase[check phase] --for each route--> checkRoute
    checkRoute[check route] -->|error| checkPhase
    checkRoute -->|done| phaseHitMiss{is phase\nhit or miss?}
    phaseHitMiss --> |phase == hit| matchingDone[matching done]
    phaseHitMiss --> |phase == miss| set404[set 404]
    phaseHitMiss --> |phase not neither| nextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nor\nphase == miss/error}
    set404 --> nextPhaseIsWhat{path found\nsuccessfully?}
    nextPhaseIsWhat --> |true\nset next phase to hit| checkPhase
    nextPhaseIsWhat --> |false\nset next phase| checkPhase
```
```

When we encounter a list of a locale redirects, we have to check for any cookie value that is provided as a way to override the request's `Accept-Language` header. Both the cookie and the header have to be parsed into a form that represents the locales, sorted by [quality](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Accept-Language#directives). Vercel considers the locale in the cookie to take precendence over the header.

If we find a locale that matches the current request, we apply a redirect for it and exit the routing process. At the same time, whenever we encounter a source route with a locale property, we store the list of locales for later use when dealing with edge cases.

> The custom behaviour that was referred to above comes into play when processing sub-path locale source routes. The `src` value that is used to match the request appears to only be for `/`, instead of `^/$`. This means that we have to check if the `src` value is a regular expression, and if not, handle it another way, to ensure that we are on the root. This is because automatic locale detection should [only](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/building-your-application/routing/internationalization#automatic-locale-detection) occur at the root of the site.

Reviewer: very nit 😅 

```suggestion
The custom behaviour that was referred to above comes into play when processing sub-path locale source routes. The `src` value that is used to match the request appears to only be for `/`, instead of `^/$`. This means that we have to check if the `src` value is a regular expression, and if not, handle it another way, to ensure that we are on the root. This is because automatic locale detection should [only occur at the application's root](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/building-your-application/routing/internationalization#automatic-locale-detection).
```

In the event that the rewritten path is the same as the current path, we opt to send the request to the next phase when the current phase is not `miss`. This custom check for the `miss` phase is necessary in order to prevent infite loops for requests to `/_next/static/...`, and `/_next/data/...`, as they may be rewritten to themselves when calling `check`. As such, if we are in the `miss` phase, we instead update the status code to 404.

If the rewritten path was not equal to the current path but the current phase is `miss`, we instead send the request to the `filesystem` phase if the path does not exist in the build output. If it does exist, we just reset the status code if it was previously 404. This is to deal with the case where a rewrite in the `none` phase contrasts with one in the `miss` phase, e.g. with internationalization (i18n).

#### Continuing with the Routing Process

After all of the above has been completed, the final part to check for a (matching) route is whether it would like us to continue matching (it does so by setting its `continue` field to `true`). If it does not, we have reached the end of matching for this phase.

#### Diagram

> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     checkRoute --> CheckSourceMatch{check source match}
>     CheckSourceMatch -->|true| ApplyOverrides[apply overrides]
>     CheckSourceMatch -->|false| EndRoutingSkip[`skip`]
>     ApplyOverrides --> ApplyInternationalization[apply internationalization\nredirects]
>     ApplyInternationalization --> HasMiddleware{has middleware}
>     HasMiddleware --> |yes| RunMiddlewareResult{run middleware}
>     HasMiddleware --> |no| ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination[apply route headers\napply status code\napply destination]
>     RunMiddlewareResult --> |success| ApplyMiddlewareHeaders[apply middleware\nheaders]
>     RunMiddlewareResult --> |error| EndRoutingError[`error`]
>     ApplyMiddlewareHeaders --> ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination
>     ApplyHeadersStatusAndDestination --> ShouldCheck{should check filesystem}
>     ShouldCheck --> |yes| PathsEqual{new path is equal}
>     PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase = miss| Return404[set status to 404] --> ShouldContinue
>     PathsEqual --> |yes\n+\nphase != miss| checkNextPhase[check next phase]
>     PathsEqual --> |false| checkNonePhase[check `none` phase]
>     ShouldCheck --> |false| ShouldContinue{should continue\n and has no\nredirect}
>     ShouldContinue --> |true| ReturnNext[`next`]
>     ShouldContinue --> |false| ReturnDone[`done`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    checkRoute --> checkSourceMatch{path\nmatches\nsource?}
    checkSourceMatch -->|yes| applyOverrides[apply overrides]
    checkSourceMatch -->|no| endRoutingSkip[return `skip`]
    applyOverrides --> hasMiddleware{has middleware}
    hasMiddleware --> |yes| runMiddlewareResult{run middleware}
    hasMiddleware --> |no| apply
    runMiddlewareResult --> |success| apply[apply headers,\nstatus code\nand destination]
    runMiddlewareResult --> |error| endRoutingError[return `error`]
    apply --> shouldCheck{should check filesystem}
    shouldCheck --> |yes| pathsEqual{current path\n==\nrewritten path}
    pathsEqual --> |yes + phase = miss| return404[set 404] --> shouldContinue
    pathsEqual --> |yes + phase != miss| checkNextPhase[go to next phase]
    pathsEqual --> |false| checkNonePhase[go to `none` phase]
    shouldCheck --> |false| shouldContinue{should continue}
    shouldContinue --> |true| returnNext[return `next`]
    shouldContinue --> |false| returnDone[return `done`]
```
```

Reviewer: but I'm not completely sure about the `should check filesystem` could you clarify what you mean there? 🙏

Author: sorry, that just means `route.check === true`

Author: how come you think we should remove the apply internationalizaton part? that is something in the vercel build output that is dealt with when checking routes, because it is a property on a source route - `route.locale`. I would have thought we should be including it in this diagram?

Reviewer: > how come you think we should remove the apply internationalizaton part? that is something in the vercel build output that is dealt with when checking routes, because it is a property on a source route - route.locale. I would have thought we should be including it in this diagram?

Sorry I didn't noticed that I removed that part, I must have worker off an older commit, sorry about that I'll fix my suggestion :pray:

```

### Serving Responses

After the routing process has reached the end and found a match, the final thing to do is serve the response. First, it is necessary to determine whether a redirect should occur, based on the location header, so that it can be returned before running a function or fetching a static asset.

If a redirect should occur, we simply return the redirect response.

Otherwise, we fetch the record from the build output for the matched path. If we failed to find a record, it results in a 404 response. With the record, we can then run any functions, or fetch any static assets, depending on the type. Before running the function, the final search parameters are applied to the request object.

After the response object has been created, we apply any headers and status codes that were specified by the source routes.

Finally, we return the response.

#### Diagram

> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     serve --> CheckRedirect{check for location header}
>     CheckRedirect --> |true| ReturnRedirect[return redirect response]
>     CheckRedirect --> |false| FetchItemFromOutput[fetch item from build output]
>     FetchItemFromOutput --> ApplySearchParams[apply search params to request]
>     ApplySearchParams --> RetrieveResponseForItem{fetch or run\nitem response}
>     RetrieveResponseForItem --> |success| ApplyHeadersAndStatus[apply headers + status]
>     RetrieveResponseForItem --> |error| ReturnError[return error response]
>     ApplyHeadersAndStatus --> ReturnResponse[return final response object]
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    serve --> checkRedirect{check for\n`location`\nheader}
    checkRedirect --> |found| returnRedirect[return redirect response]
    checkRedirect --> |not found| fetchItemFromOutput[fetch item from build output]
    fetchItemFromOutput --> applySearchParams[apply search params to request]
    applySearchParams --> retrieveResponseForItem{fetch item\nresponse}
    retrieveResponseForItem --> |success| applyHeadersAndStatus[apply headers + status]
    retrieveResponseForItem --> |error| returnError[return error response]
    applyHeadersAndStatus --> returnResponse[return final response object]
```
```
